.TH C1541 1 "November 2016" "VICE"
.SH NAME
c1541 \- a stand alone disk image maintenance program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.IR c1541
[options] [image]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IR c1541
is a stand alone program that can be used for D64, D71, D81, X64 and G64
disk image file maintenance.  It is part of the
.IR VICE
emulator.
.P
.IR c1541
can be used both in interactive and batch mode.  It will start in interactive
mode if no images and no options are specified or if one image is specified;
when started in interactive mode, command line editing and command history
are available.
.P
Each command line option for use in batch mode has an interactive mode
counterpart, that is shown in parenthesis.
.TP 8
.B \-@ \fIcommand\fR
execute CBM DOS command
.TP
.B \-attach \fIimage\fR (attach \fIimage\fR)
attach \fIimage\fR for use.  All consequent commands in interactive mode will
refer to this image.
.TP
.B \-block \fItrack\fR \fIsector\fR \fI[offset]\fR \fI[unit]\fR (block \fItrack\fR \fIsector\fR \fI[offset]\fR \fI[unit]\fR)
show disk blocks in hex format.
.TP
.B \-copy \fIimage\fR \fIoldname1\fR \fI[oldname2...]\fR \fInewname\fR (copy \fIoldname1\fR \fI[oldname2...]\fR \fInewname\fR)
concatenate \fIoldname1\fR, \fIoldname2\fR... into \fInewname\fR on \fIimage\fR
(can be used to copy files).
.TP
.B \-delete \fIimage\fR \fIfiles...\fR (delete \fIfiles...\fR)
delete \fIfiles\fR from \fIimage\fR
.TP
.B \-dir \fI[pattern]\fR (dir \fI[pattern]\fR)
list directory. See the \fBlist\fR command for details.
.TP
.B \-extract \fIimage\fR (extract \fIimage\fR)
extract all files from \fIimage\fR.
.TP
.B \-format \fIimage\fR (format \fIimage\fR '\fIname,id\fR')
format the disk image \fIimage\fR with the specified label.  \fIimage\fR is
created if it does not exist.
.TP
.B \-geosextract \fIsource\fR (geosextract \fIsource\fR)
extract all the files to the file system and GEOS Convert them.
.TP
.B \-geosread \fIsource\fR \fI[destination]\fR (geosread \fIsource\fR \fI[destination]\fR)
read GEOS \fIsource\fR from the disk image and copy it as a Convert file into
\fIdestination\fR in the file system. If \fIdestination\fR is not specified,
copy it into a file with the same name as \fIsource\fR.
.TP
.B \-geoswrite \fIsource\fR (geoswrite \fIsource\fR)
write GEOS Convert file \fIsource\fR from the file system on a disk image.
.TP
.B \-help \fI[command]\fR (help)
show help on all commands or more detailed help on a specific \fIcommand\fR
.TP
.B \-info \fIimage\fR \fI[unit]\fR (info \fI[unit]\fR)
show information about image (format, geometry, error-block, write-protect)
.TP
.B \-list \fI[pattern]\fR (list)
list directory. The optional \fIpattern\fR accepts the usual
CBM DOS wildcards (\fB*\fR and \fB?\fR) and also supports file type selection
with '=X', where \fBX\fR is one of \fBS\fR, \fBP\fR, \fBU\fR or \fBR\fR.
Multiple sub patterns can be specified by using comma's.
.TP
.B \-name \fIdiskname[,id]\fR \fI[unit]\fR (name \fIdiskname[,id]\fR \fI[unit]\fR)
set diskname and optionally id.
.TP
.B \-p00save \fIenable\fR \fI[unit]\fR (p00save \fIenable\fR \fI[unit\fR)
save P00 files to the file system.
.TP
.B \-read \fIimage\fR \fI1541name\fR \fI[fsname]\fR (read \fI1541name\fR \fI[fsname]\fR)
extract \fI1541name\fR from the disk image into \fIfsname\fR (\fI1541name\fR
by default) from \fIimage\fR.
.TP
.B \-rename \fIoldname\fR \fInewname\fR (rename \fIoldname\fR \fInewname\fR)
rename files. The files must be on the same drive.
.TP
.B \-show \fI'copying'\fR|\fI'warranty'\fR (show \fI'copying'\fR|\fI'warranty'\fR)
show license or warranty information.
.TP
.B \-tape \fIimage\fR \fItapeimage\fR \fI[files...]\fR (tape \fIimage\fR \fItapeimage\fR \fI[files...]\fR)
transfer \fIfiles\fR from \fItapeimage\fR to \fIimage\fR (default is all files).
.TP
.B \-unlynx \fIarchive\fR \fI[unit]\fR (unlynx \fIarchive\fR \fI[unit]\fR)
dissolve Lynx \fIarchive\fR.
.TP
.B \-validate \fIimage\fR (validate)
validate \fImage\fR.
.TP
.B \-verbose \fR[off] (verbose [off])
set verbose mode. Output extra logging information, disable with \fBverbose off\fR.
.TP
.B \-write \fIimage\fR \fIfsname\fR \fI[1541name]\fR (write \fIfsname\fR \fI[1541name]\fR)
write \fIfsname\fR to \fIimage\fR as \fI1541name\fR (\fIfsname\fR by default).
(works with \fIP00\fR files as well).
.P
When more than one command is specified in batch mode, all of them are
executed in the same order they have on the command line.
.P
If you use
.B \-
as a file name, it stands for \fIstdin\fR or \fIstdout\fR.
.P
Exit interactive mode with either \fBexit\fR or \fBquit\fR.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR VICE (1),
.BR cartconv (1),
.BR petcat (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Teemu Rantanen <tvr@cs.hut.fi>
.br
Ettore Perazzoli <ettore@comm2000.it>
.br
Andreas Boose <boose@linux.rz.fh-hannover.de>
.br
Jouko Valta <jopi@stekt.oulu.fi>
.P
with improvements by
.P
.br
Olaf Seibert <rhialto@mbfys.kun.nl>
.br
Gerhard Wesp <gwesp@cosy.sbg.ac.at>
